[BLOG] Reducing your environmental impact with the Linkerd service mesh (#234)
cncf/tag-env-sustainability: website/content/blog/reducing-your-environmental-impact-with-the-linkerd-service-mesh.md

> #  Reducing your environmental impact with the Linkerd service mesh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
title: Reducing your environmental impact with the Linkerd service mesh
description: Linkerd is the most efficient and sustainable service mesh on the market, capable of reducing the overall resource footprint of your system.
slug: 2023-reducing-env-impact-with-linkerd
weight: 1
date:   2023-10-10 10:00:00 +0000
author: Catherine Paganini
---
```

Reviewer: @CathPag I have added a description. Please update the description with whatever you feel works best for the article.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Guest post as part of the [cloud native sustainability week](https://tag-env-sustainability.cncf.io/cloud-native-sustainability-week/)*

```
On the TAG ENV blog we need to highlight if a blog is from the TAG directly (an artifact from a WG for example).

##  Distributing work improves with Linkerd over Native Kubernetes

Kubernetes allows us to more densely pack processes on computers. Servers have a certain capacity to do work, but there is always a gap between how much work they _can_ do and how much the system asks them to do. Kubernetes schedules work more efficiently on existing servers (bin packing), allowing us to run more stuff on the same hardware — a big win! 

Linkerd improves those efficiency gains even further by taking a different approach to endpoint selection. While Kubernetes balances its load based on connections, Linkerd instead does it based on requests. As a result, Linkerd saves you significant compute resources. Let's break that down.  

In the old world, applications would make one connection, send a request, get an answer, and close that connection — not very efficient when you have hundreds or thousands of requests per minute. Today, HTTP/2 and gRPC make a connection once and send multiple requests to avoid this inefficiency.

> Kubernetes doesn't handle that out-of-the-box, though. Natively, Kubernetes simply directs the entire connection to a Pod and doesn't worry about how many requests are coming down the connection. This can be problematic: if you're running 10 Pods for a particular workload, and 50 requests come down a single connection, Kubernetes will send all 50 to the same single Pod. In the best case, the other nine Pods just sit idle; in the worst case, the one Pod doing all the work wasn't sized for this peak load, resulting in a crash.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes doesn't handle that out-of-the-box, though. Natively, Kubernetes simply directs the entire connection to a Pod and doesn't worry about how many requests are coming down the connection. This can be problematic: if you're running 10 Pods for a particular workload, and 50 requests come down a single connection, Kubernetes will send all 50 to the same single Pod. In the best case, the other nine Pods just sit idle; in the worst case, the one Pod doing all the work wasn't sized for this peak load and crashes.
```

This inefficiency happens because Kubernetes wasn't designed to look inside the connection and decipher each request – doing so requires a lot of knowledge of what exact protocol is being spoken, and is far out of scope for Kubernetes itself. As Kelsey Hightower famously said, "[Kubernetes is a platform for building platforms](https://twitter.com/kelseyhightower/status/935252923721793536)" – Kubernetes never intended to solve that particular problem since other projects could.

##  Minimizing unusable resources 

Imagine you want to fill up a box with rocks. The smaller the rocks, the less wasted space (air gaps between rocks). The same applies to Pods: sizing by peak demand tends to leave much larger amounts of unused capacity, requiring more Pods and costing you money. Allowing sizing Pods by average demand instead of peak demand, as discussed above, lets you get more out of your existing resources by not forcing you to leave unused capacity just in case, improving your horizontal scalability by allowing you to run more smaller Pods.

> This means that under load, Linkerd can distribute traffic across Pods much more effectively since it _does_ do the work to understand the protocol and be able to load-balance individual requests. This allows you to assign fewer compute resources to each Pod because you know the load will be equally distributed, and you, therefore, don't have to dedicate huge amounts of resources to the possibility of huge spikes. For example, Entain Australia, a sports betting company, wrote a great [CNCF case study on how Linkerd helped them significantly reduce latency and cost](https://www.cncf.io/case-studies/entain/) thanks to intelligent load balancing. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that under load, Linkerd can distribute traffic across Pods much more effectively since it _does_  the work to understand the protocol and load-balances individual requests. This allows you to assign fewer compute resources to each Pod because you know the load will be equally distributed, and you, therefore, don't have to dedicate huge amounts of resources to the possibility of huge spikes. For example, Entain Australia, a sports betting company, wrote a great [CNCF case study on how Linkerd helped them significantly reduce latency and cost](https://www.cncf.io/case-studies/entain/) thanks to intelligent load balancing. 
```
